## Discussion

We have shown that recurrent CNNs, DanQ in particular, are an effective architecture on which to base across-species sequence to chromatin state models.
By incorporating sequence data from multiple species we not only increase the size of our training data set, a critical factor for deep learning models, but also reduce the amount of confounding neutral variation around functional motifs.
Being able to predict chromatin state across species also opens the door for studies of regulatory regions in additional angiosperm species with only genomic sequence data.
Beyond angiosperms, the a2z model's predictive ability in yeast suggests it is capable of working effectively across wide evolutionary timescales.
Unsurprisingly, we noticed that the performance across different peak classes relates to their relative abundance in the training set.
Future work looking at ways to balance or weight observations in rarer peak classes would likely improve the generalizability of the models.
This is particularly important for working towards better across-tissue chromatin state models, where the tissue-specific peaks are usually the minority in any given data set, as well as with larger genomes, where distal peaks are more prevalent.

Further, most sequence-based model architectures, including DanQ, only take in _cis_ sequence, which is known [@doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2014.10.003] to account for only a portion of the variation in local chromatin state.
Model architectures that can effectively incorporate _trans_ factors, such as chromatin-remodeling TFs on neighboring regulatory elements [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.10.040] or small RNA silencing [@doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2011.01309.x], will likely surpass current methods but their across-species applicability remains an open question.
By far the most prevalent error of the accessibility models in particular is calling false-positives, which may be due to lack of _trans_ information.
A portion of these false-positives may also be undercalled ATAC-Seq peaks that are open in very specific cell-types, since the peaks from Lu _et al._ 2019 were called with relatively conservative thresholds.

Interpreting deep learning models remains a challenge, but is an especially critical one to overcome.
Here we use occlusion and perturbation-based methods instead of gradient-based approaches like TF-MoDISco and saliency maps to trade longer computational times for reduced noise [@doi:10.1109/ICCVW.2019.00510] in effect estimates.
Particularly since eukaryotic TF binding sites are known to be degenerate [@doi:10.1534/genetics.112.143370], SNP effect sizes in regulatory sequences are likely to be small and harder to estimate accurately with our limited data.
The lack of separation between clades and species in the MDS plots for each chromatin feature is not too surprising.
The across-species models must learn to prioritize motifs that are generalizable across species and so potential species- or clade-specific motifs are ignored.
The sawtooth pattern, which is stronger in some TFs than in others, could be a manifestation of the model learning a helical face bias for specific TF binding.
Further controls will be necessary to investigate that hypothesis, as the pattern may also be an artifact of the max pooling or LSTM layers.
Not all of the pGIA results agree with current theory.
For example, some of the motifs have a noticeable strand bias, but enhancers are known to operate in an orientation-independent [@doi:10.1126/science.1232542] manner.
Given some of them are relatively simple motifs, it is possible that these matches are surrogates for important non-binding motifs.
We chose to rank JASPAR motifs by maximum global importance across the sequence as a rough estimate for importance to regulating the given chromatin feature state, though other methods of ranking could be preferable depending on the use case.
Since positive observations are created by extending from the midpoint, the effect of TFs that bind to the center of accessible or unmethylated regions will be easier to estimate because they are more aligned across the test set sequences.
In contrast, TFs that bind to the edges of accessible or unmethylated regions are not aligned since the lengths of the true, unextended ATAC-Seq peaks are not equal.

The top 10 JASPAR motifs are very different between the features but remarkably similar between the species within each feature.
Of the two known [@doi:10.1038/nature24300;@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20883-w;@doi:10.1016/j.molp.2021.03.004] plant pioneer transcription factors (LEC1 and LEAFY), only LEAFY is present in JASPAR, but does not show up in the top 10 motifs for any of the models.
This is not unexpected as it is a floral TF and our models are trained on leaf accessible regions.
The strong presence of the TCP family in the highly ranked accessibility TFs is promising, since they are known [@doi:10.1038/s41477-020-0715-2] to be involved in chromatin remodeling.
What role the Dof-type TFs play in accessibility is still unclear due to the wide variety of roles they play [@doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2013.03.016].
The shared top two motifs between the methylation models have evidence that they are involved in plant pathogen response [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0810206106;@doi:10.1093/mp/ssr002].
Knowing that plant immunity genes are among the most variable [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.038], it would be interesting to see if these unmethylated regions are harboring a large library of rapidly inducible resistance genes that remain mostly inaccessible until needed.
With the high similarity in binding motifs by definition within families, it is quite possible that some highly ranked TFs are false positives due to association with the few causal TFs in the same family.
While it is useful to use JASPAR motifs as specific testable hypotheses, there are only 530 motifs in the database and with the lowest estimates of angiosperm TF gene count starting at about 1,500 [@doi:10.1093/gbe/evq032], critical TFs may still be missing.

Moving forward, more focus is necessary on collecting high-quality accessible regions across a variety of cell-types to train models that are capable of generalizing across tissues as well as species.
With the release of highly-accurate protein-folding models such as AlphaFold2 [@doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2], the missing species-specific TF binding motifs in any genome may finally be feasible to estimate using simulated DNA docking approaches.
Now that many deep learning-based approaches borrowed from other fields [@doi:10.1038/s41592-021-01252-x;@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-18832-8] have been shown to be successful in mapping genomic sequence to a variety of cellular phenotypes, better interpretation methods to assess what these black box models are learning will be important to optimize towards more biologically-relevant architectures.
