## Materials and Methods

### Software environment

The software environment for the experiments was managed by [conda](https://conda.io) (v4.10.3).
Packages were downloaded from the conda-forge [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.4774216] and bioconda [@doi:10.1038/s41592-018-0046-7] channels.
Software versions not explicitly mentioned in the methods are defined in the conda environment files in the companion code repository on Zenodo [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.5724562].
All of the code and data files required to reproduce this manuscript, including all experiments and figures, are available in the associated Zenodo repository.
The trained parameters for all models are also available in the associated Zenodo repository.

### Raw data

The angiosperm ATAC-seq peaks [@doi:10.1038/s41477-019-0548-z] were downloaded from NCBI GEO accession GSE128434.
Genomes and annotations for _Arabidopsis thaliana_ (TAIR10) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkr1090], _Eutrema salsugineum_ (v1.0) [@doi:10.3389/fpls.2013.00046], _Phaseolus vulgaris_ (v1.0) [@doi:10.1038/ng.3008], _Glycine max_ (Wm82.a2.v1) [@doi:10.1038/nature08670], _Brachypodium distachyon_ (v3.0) [@doi:10.1038/nature08747], _Oryza sativa_ (v7.0) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkl976], _Setaria viridis_ (v1.0) [@doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0681-2], _Populus trichocarpa_ (v3.0) [@doi:10.1126/science.1128691], and _Sorghum bicolor_ (v3.1 and v3.1.1) [@doi:10.1111/tpj.13781] were downloaded from Phytozome.
Reference genomes and annotations for _Zea mays_ (AGPv4.38) [@doi:10.1038/nature22971] and _Hordeum vulgare_ (IBSC_v2) [@doi:10.1038/nature22043] were downloaded from Ensembl Plants.
The genome and annotation for _Asparagus officinalis_ (v1.1) [@doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01064-8] was downloaded from the Asparagus Genome Project website.
Unmethylated regions (UMRs) for the grasses were downloaded from the supplemental information of Crisp _et al._ 2020 [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2010250117].
For the unmethylated regions, the _Z. mays_ AGPv4 genome and annotation was downloaded from MaizeGDB.
The _Vitis vinifera_ genome and annotation (Genoscope.12X) [@doi:10.1038/nature06148] were downloaded from the Genoscope website.

JASPAR 2020 Core _Plantae_ [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz1001] motifs and clusters were downloaded from the JASPAR website.
Maize AGPv4 RepeatMasker annotations were downloaded from NCBI.
Yeast and human cell-line GM12878 ATAC-seq peaks [@doi:10.1101/gr.192294.115] were downloaded from NCBI GEO accession GSE66386.
The yeast (sacCer3 April 2011) [@doi:10.1038/42755] and human (hg19) [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001091] genomes were downloaded from NCBI.
Maize scATAC-seq peaks [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.014] were downloaded from NCBI GEO accession GSE155178.
Genome files were indexed using samtools [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giab008].

### UMR calling on non-grass species

UMR analysis on the non-grass species was performed as per Crisp _et al._ 2020 using the data summarized in Table {@tbl:dicot-umr-data}.
Briefly, sequencing reads were trimmed and quality checked using Trim galore! (0.6.4_dev), powered by cutadapt (v1.18) [@doi:10.14806/ej.17.1.200] and fastqc (v0.11.4).
For all libraries, 20bp were trimmed from the 5’ ends of both R1 and R2 reads and aligned with bsmap (v2.74) [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-10-232] to the respective genomes with the following parameters: -v 5 to allow 5 mismatches, -r 0 to report only unique mapping pairs, and -p 1 and -q 20 to allow quality trimming to Q20.
Output SAM files were parsed with SAMtools [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352] fixsam, sorted, and then indexed.
Picard MarkDuplicates [@picard-tools] was used to remove duplicates, [BamTools](https://github.com/pezmaster31/bamtools) filter to remove improperly paired reads, and bamUtil clipOverlap [@doi:10.1101/gr.176552.114] to trim overlapping reads so as to only count cytosines once per sequenced molecule in a pair for PE reads.
The methylratio.py script from bsmap was used to extract per-site methylation data summaries for each context (CH/CHG/CHH) and reads were summarised into non-overlapping 100bp windows tiling the genome.
WGBS pipelines are available on [GitHub](https://github.com/pedrocrisp/crisplab_epigenomics/tree/master/methylome).
To identify unmethylated regions, each 100bp tile of the genome was classified into one of six domains or types: “missing data” (including “no data” and “no sites”), “High CHH/RdDM”, “Heterochromatin”, “CG only”, “Unmethylated” or “intermediate”, in preferential order as per Crisp _et al._ 2020 [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2010250117].

### Training data preprocessing

Interval manipulation was done using a combination of the GNU coreutils, gawk, and bedtools [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033].
We created our positive observations by symmetrically extending each accessible or unmethylated region from the midpoint by half of the window size (300, 600, or 1000 bp).
Our negative observations are randomly sampled from the rest of the genome not covered by the union of the resized positive observations and the original peaks.
Observations were labeled as genic if more than half of the range overlapped with a gene annotation, as proximal if not genic and more than half of the range was within the proximal cutoff (2kb), and as distal if neither genic nor proximal.
Previous work [@doi:10.1101/2020.07.28.224485;@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0067863] has shown that classifiers train best on balanced sets with an equal number of positive and negative examples, but should be tested on the true class distribution to get an accurate performance estimate.
Therefore, for the across-species models, we randomly sampled 6% of the observations and divided them equally between a validation and test set.
For the within-species models we randomly chose a hold-out chromosome to follow best practice for reducing contamination of related sequences between the training and test sets.
As a heuristic to select held-out chromosomes across genome assemblies of varying contiguity, we randomly select within chromosomes that are at least a million base pairs long and have more than five positive observations.
We then downsampled the remaining observations to obtain a training set for the across-species models with a balanced representation of species and target class.
Ns were encoded as vectors with equal probability assigned to each base as opposed to all zeros, which is another common practice. Sequences were extracted using BioPython [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp163] and pyfaidx [@doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.970v1]

### Training and evaluating models

The DanQ, Basset, CharPlant, and DeeperDeepSEA architectures were implemented and trained using Keras [@https://keras.io] and TensorFlow [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.4724125].
The across-species models were tested on a given species and trained on the remainder.
Within-species models were tested on a held-out chromosome and trained on the other chromosomes.
Since our ratio of accessible to inaccessible chromatin observations is heavily unbalanced, we focus more on the area under the precision-recall curve (auPR) to measure model performance as opposed to the more commonly-reported area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (auROC).
Performance metrics were measured using scikit-learn [@scikit-learn] and curves were plotted using matplotlib [@doi:10.1109/MCSE.2007.55].
Each model was trained three times to obtain an estimate of variability in performance due to the stochastic nature of the model variable initialization.
For comparison between models we used the first of the three trained models.

The bag-of-kmers model was trained and tested independently on the within-species _Z. mays_ accessibility and methylation training data using code adapted from Tu _et al._ 2020 [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-18832-8] and compared to the within-species _Z. mays_ accessibility and methylation models.
The Basset, CharPlant, and DeeperDeepSEA architectures were trained in the same manner as the across-species DanQ configuration with the same window size of 600 base pairs.
For the two-step masked model comparison we masked the _Z. mays_-held-out accessibility and methylation model predictions to zero if more than half of a region overlapped with an annotated repeat from RepeatMasker.
We used pybedtools [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr539] to compute overlaps between the test set and the repeats.
We preprocessed the yeast and human cell-line ATAC-seq peaks in the same manner as the angiosperm ATAC-seq peaks and used the _Z. mays_-held-out model to make predictions on the yeast and human peaks.

The grasses accessibility model was trained and evaluated in the same manner as the across-species angiosperm accessibility model but restricted to only grass species.
The "balDist" accessibility model extended the training data balancing to distance class in addition to chromatin state, meaning the training data had equal representation for each species, distance class (genic, proximal, distal), and target class (accessible/inaccessible or unmethylated/methylated).
The "exp" accessibility model changed the activation function on the convolutional layer from ReLU to exponential.
The "all_v_AtZm" accessibility model was tested on _A. thaliana_ and _Z. mays_ and trained on the rest of the angiosperm species.
All trained model weights are available on Zenodo [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.5724562].

The dendrogram in Figure {@fig:performance} was plotted using the Phylo package of Biopython [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-13-209].

### Analysis of maize scATAC-Seq data

scATAC-seq peaks were preprocessed in the same manner as the other peaks to generate uniform 600 bp regions.
Peaks were classified as open in a cell-type if their CPM (counts per million, a normalized depth measurement) value was greater than $log_{2} 5$ in that cell-type, which would represent no reads observed in that peak in that cell-type, based on the methods reported in Marand _et al._ 2021 [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.014].
Accessibility was predicted using the _Z. mays_-held-out model.

### TF-MoDISco and kmer occlusion

We ran TF-MoDISco [@arxiv:1811.00416] with a sliding window size of 15bp, a flank size of 5bp, and a target seqlet FDR of 0.15. For converting seqlets to patterns, we set "trim_to_window_size" to 15bp, "initial_flank_to_add" to 5bp, and specified a final minimum cluster size of 60.

The kmer-occlusion method involves masking (replacing with N's) a sliding kmer across each sequence in a given model's test set.
The difference between the model's masked and unmasked prediction is the kmer's "effect size".
We ran the kmer-occlusion method with a kmer size of 10bp on all species and chromatin feature pairs.
The top 5% accessibility- or methylation-reducing kmers per species and chromatin feature were classified as "high-effect" kmers.
We performed an all-by-all global alignment of the high-effect kmers per species and chromatin feature using Biopython's pairwise aligner [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp163].
Using the alignment distance matrix, we clustered these high-effect kmers into 100 representative kmers using k-medoids [@doi:10.13140/2.1.4453.2009].
We took the 100 medoid kmers for each species and chromatin feature pair and did another all-by-all global alignment to create another distance matrix.
The embedded kmer coordinates were created using the MDS function in scikit-learn's manifold package.
High-effect kmers were matched to JASPAR 2020 CORE _plantae_ motifs using FIMO [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr064] and a q-value threshold of 0.05.

### Positional Global Importance Analysis

Global importance analysis (GIA) [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008925] measures the average difference in model predictions from a sampled background set of sequences to the same set with the sequence embedded within them.
We ran a positional GIA (pGIA) analysis for each species and chromatin feature pair by embedding the consensus motifs of the 530 JASPAR 2020 CORE _plantae_ TFs in both orientations at each possible position within 1,000 generated 600bp sequences.
The 600bp sequences were generated using a profile model, where bases were sampled at each position according to their relative frequency in the model's test set at that position.
GNU parallel [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.1146014] was used to speed up the pGIA analysis.

JASPAR motifs were ranked by their maximum global importance across all positions.
TF families and classes were obtained from the JASPAR API (v1).

### Manuscript

This manuscript was formatted with Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128].
